International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews, Vol 4, no 4, pp 2 421-2426, April 2023  
 
International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews  
 
Journal homepage: www.ijrpr.com   ISSN 2582 -7421  
 
 
Helmet  Wear  Detection for ATM Security  
1K. Kasi Rao, 1K. Jeevan  Kumar , 1P. Gowtham, 1K. Aditya, 2Ch. RajaShekara Rao  
1Student, Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, A ditya institute of technology and management college , Tekkali , Srikakulam, 
Andhra Pradesh, India, 532201  
2Professor, Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, A ditya institute of technology and management  College, Tekkali, Srikakulam, 
Andhra Pradesh, India, 532201  
ABSTRACT : 
The Cash Machine (ATM) is a convenient way to withdraw cash and access other banking services, however because of the signifi cant danger involved, security 
is recommended. The ATM Center's video surveillance system typically records every customer action;  however fraudsters frequently use disguises to avoid being 
seen. Due to the occulted face caused by helmets, it is difficult to examine and locate them. As a result, our technology wil l automatically identify helmets in 
surveillance footage and send out SM S messages. In this article, we presented a system for detecting occulted faces caused by helmets in surveillance footage. To  
detect the person and helmet, we used the object detection weight of the yolo model. Initially, background subtraction was em ploye d to remove unwanted video 
content. The skin -color ratio and LBP characteristic will then be extracted.  After detection of person then the sms message is send to respect ive bank manager.  
Key Words: Machine Learning , CNN , Image  Processing. Object detection  model,  CNN  algorithm, YOLO.  
I. INTRODUCTION:  
As is well known, automatic teller machines (ATMs) are crucial to current economic activity. It offers a quick and simple way  to handle cost -effective 
transactions between banks and their clients. Unfortunately, it also gives thieves a simple means to obta in illicit funds. A customer will be required to 
enter their bank card information and a password when using an ATM. Additionally, each ATM has a surveillance system that rec ords the consumer's 
face information for security purposes. However, when a frauds ter uses an ATM to conduct an illicit transaction, they typically cover their faces with 
helmets, face masks, or other items to prevent the surveillance system from capturing their facial information. Therefore, it  won't fulfil the purpose of the 
surveilla nce system.  
In the past, the usage of ATM services grew quickly because they provided clients with a more convenient option to withdraw m oney at any time (24 
hours a day, 7 days a week). The banking industry has adjusted to the rise of digital transaction s. However, a lot of security issues plague the ATM 
service, which has an impact on the entire banking industry. Due to ATM crimes such card skimming, cash trapping, and shoulde r surfing, secure financial 
transactions are not guaranteed. The rate of theft and robbery is rising every year, according to a new report. Due to a lack of protection, frauds occur 
frequently at ATM centres. According to historical data, 5500 fraud cases are reported annually.  
The implementation of automatic helmet detection in CCTV  footage at ATM Center is suggested despite difficulties with video quality, lighting, and 
occlusion. In the back, significant work has been done in the fields of tracking and moving object detection with CCTV survei llance applications . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews, Vol 4, no 4, pp 2 421-2426 April  2023                                          2422  
 
 Direction Flow  
The main objective of the proposed effort is to deploy surveillance cameras in ATM outlets to identify people wearing safety helmets. Combining deep 
learning models with machine vision makes this possible. The used model is YOLO's pre -trained object detect ion, which can identify over 3000 different 
object classes. Through the use of Region Based Convolutional Neural Networks (R -CNN), this model was pre -trained. The system receives data from a 
live surveillance stream. A SMS alert message is sent to the cont rol room or monitoring team when a person is observed to be wearing a helmet. The 
primary goal of the work is to prevent suspicious be haviour  or ATM robberies.  
Three main steps make up the work's implementation. The first one is applying the YOLO model to  find the Helmet object and segmenting it for further 
analysis. The segmented image is then used to determine whether the user in the ATM outlet is wearing a helmet by looking for  the skin tone inside the 
detected object. If a person is found at the last s tage, an SMS alert is sent to the monitoring team.  
II. RELATED WORK:  
An summary of the literature review is provided in this chapter. Some of the researchers' pertinent work is represented in th is chapter.  
Researchers have explored several of the currently  used strategies for ATM monitoring systems; a few of them are covered below.  
1.The conventional state -of-the-art image processing algorithms available for occluded and covered face detection, human abnormal behaviour  analysis, 
and illegal object detection may not work for ATM having different environment, abnormal gestures, and crime devices, accordi ng to Sikandar's paper 
"ATM crime detection using image processing integrated video surveillance: a systematic review" p ublished on 2018.  
2.In his paper "Automatic Detection of Bike -riders Without Helmet Using Surveillance Videos in Real -time" published in 2016, Dahiya provided a 
framework for the automatic detection of bike -riders without helmet utilising surveillance vide os in real time. The suggested method initially uses 
backdrop removal and object segmentation to identify bike riders in surveillance video.  
3.In his study "Helmet Violation Processing Using Deep Learning" published in 2018, Dharma Raj suggested using dee p convolutional neural networks 
(CNNs) and image processing to identify motorbike riders who are not wearing helmets. The system includes motorbike detection , a classification of 
riders wearing helmets or not, and motorcycle licence plate identification.  
4.In his work "Helmet Detection on Two -Wheeler Riders Using Machine Learning" published in 2018, Ramesh Babu presented a system that would use 
machine learning and image processing to identify two -wheeler riders who were not wearing helmets.  
5.Jie Li sug gested a safety helmet wearing detection approach based on image processing and machine learning in his 2017 work, "Safety he lmet wearing 
detection based on image processing and machine learning". The ViBe background modelling technique is initially used t o find moving objects in a 
power substation's fixed surveillance camera's field of view. The Histogram of Oriented Gradient (HOG) feature is retrieved t o describe the  
Inner person after acquiring the motion zone of interest.  
III. DESIGN METHODOLOGY:  
The live stream of video input on the side that is red for detection makes it difficult to identify helmet wear on ATM outlet s. The method for fraud 
detection needs to be swift and effective. This is accomplished by incorporating the machine vision notion into Python.                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews, Vol 4, no 4, pp 2 421-2426 April  2023                                          2423  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Architecture of proposed work  
System architecture showing all operational modules, including the input from the camera, object detection, picture pre -processing, skin part detection, 
and modules for helmet wear.  
Following the modules below is the helmet wear detecting module.  
1.Dataset input  
2.Object detection  
3.Image pre -processing  
4.Helmet wear detection  
1] DATASET INPUT:  
A live stream of webcam video is the dataset being examined for implementation. Since our project's goal is to detect in real -time, live stream video was 
also proposed as part of the effort.  
2] DETECTION OF OBJECTS:  
The input of the video stream is taken into account in the object detection module. CNN algorithms are used to find items in the input video stream, and 
they typically utilise regions to localise the objects inside the image. The network selectively scans those areas of the image that have a higher likelihood 
of containing an object, not the entire picture.  
Yolo first pulls an image from the video stream as an input. The supplied image is then divided into grids by the framework. On each grid, image 
categ orization and localization are applied. The bounding boxes and accompanying class probabilities for the object are then predi cted by YOLO.We 
provide the model a picture during the testing phase, and we then execute forward propagation until we receive an o utput y. The class_object=helmet was 
specified.  
3] PRE -PROCESSING  OF IMAGES: Following object detection, the image is saved as image.jpg and pre -processed for the following module. NumPy 
is used to generate a mask and read the image's height and breadth while also detecting the foreground and background. To obtain the background image, 
which is saved as background.jpg, the image is subjected to background subtraction.  
International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews, Vol 4, no 4, pp 2 421-2426 April  2023                                          2424  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOCALIZED  OBJECT  IMAGE  PRE_PROCESSING  
After removing the background from the video and separating the person from it, the actual face must be detected with the helmet detected and classified 
before feature extraction is needed to identify the helmet. Depending on the classification, an alarm will be generated if th e detected ob ject is a helmet.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skin portion detection  
 
4] WEAR OF HELMETS DETECTION:  
This module accepts a background -removed image as input, converts the image using the Hue Saturation value, COLOR_BGR2HSV, and detects the 
skin region. By determining the height and  width of the skin region, the threshold is determined to apply regardless of whether the person is wearing a 
helmet. We set the fixed value for this threshold to be 10. The bank manager's mobile number receives a warning message once the skin region is fo und 
in the object.  
We incorporated the following blocks of code to send SMS messages using fastsms.com.  
headers = {'authorization': "02SkmHrLIzofa4seCT",'Content -Type': "application/x -www -form -urlencoded",'Cache -Control': "no -cache",}  
response = requests .request("POST", url, data=payload, headers=headers)  
print(response.text)  
ALGORITHM: HELMET WEAR DETECTION  
Step 1: The trained object model YOLO is taken for object detection and define class value = "Helmet"  
Step 2: Web Camera open and taken input frames  
Step 3: Detect object based on DNN object detection  
if confidence value >= 0.92  
detect object  
else 
no helmet object  
International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews, Vol 4, no 4, pp 2 421-2426 April  2023                                          2425  
 
 Step 4: Crop object and save image and remove background  
Step 5: Load the background removed image and check skin through HSV color value  
Step 6: define upper and lower boundary values for skin  
Step 7: Draw a bounding rectangle and check height and width  if height & width >threshold skin detected  
Step 8:  Send SMS alert for helmet wear detection  
IV.    RESULTS AND DISCUSSION S: 
As a real -time monitoring application taking web camera input, safety helmet  
wear monitoring for ATM security has been presented. The live video stream is captured as still images, and CNN is suggested for object detection on 
each image. The only objec t presented for work is Helmet, which is recognised and extracted with the region of proposal. This may detect several things  
on input frames. To detect wear, this is analysed further. According to test results, a safety helmet may be detected with reason able accuracy when 
someone is wearing one. This application's deployment and maintenance costs are lower than those of competing systems  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The application home page is shown in the image above, where users can submit their information to be stored in the application database and used to 
send alert SMS. This user interface was made to be simple for individuals to use in TK. When the application is launched, a c amera window appears and 
begins to continuously monitor.  
The image below shows the application detecting a safety helmet while it is running with input image frame . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When the algorithm finds the helmet with a confidence level of 90 or above, the image is cropped for further processing. The confidence level for object 
detection for discovering Saf ety Helmet is reported as 90%. Similar to this, in an experimental investigation, the height and width of the skin region of 
the proposal are tracked over the course of ten experiments to determine the detection threshold for skin. This accurately va lidate s the helmet -wearing 
individual.  
 
 
  Detection  Parameter  Value  Result  
Object (Helmet)  Confidence  >= 0.92  Helmet detected  
Object (Helmet)  Confidence  < 0.92  No detection  
Skin Detection  Height  X Width  >= 10  Skin detected  
Skin Detection  Height X Width  < 10 No Skin detected  
International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews, Vol 4, no 4, pp 2 421-2426 April  2023                                          2426  
 
 Confidence Value for Object and skin detections  
When users are wearing the regular model Helmet, safety helmet detection operates better. The infrastructure must be well -built to handle the live video 
feed with caution, thus the detection latency may increase over time. In additional research, the system latency on the detecting part can be decreased.  
Hence  after detection of person and helmet and the alerts are send to respect ed bank manager, screen shot given below .  
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screen Shot  
V. CONCLUSION : 
For a fix on helmet and mask detection for the ATM centre's security, Real -time detection is proposed in the proposed study, using video as the input. 
Web cameras are used, and OpenCV is used to interpret the data. Yolo objected model, which is a globally accessible trained model for several classes 
of objects, is utilised in this instance to detect helmets. Following image pre -processing, the skin area is recognised. To identify skin, we shall apply HSV 
colour conversion and look forward to additional processing. then will determine the skin -color ratio. It is then compared against the threshold, and any 
changes are notified to the manager. According to the experimental findings, an alert is produced when t he height and width of the skin region are equal 
to or higher than the threshold. The detection alarm message transmitted to the control centre is shown using experimental re sults.  
REFERENCES : 
[1] Che -Yen Wen, Shih -Hsuan Chiu, Jiun -Jian Liaw and Chuan -Pin Lu, "The safety helmet detection for ATM's surveillance system via the modified 
Hough transform," IEEE 37th Annual 2003 International Carnahan Conference onSecurity Technology, 2003. Proceedings., 2003, pp . 364 -369. 
[2] Wen, Che -Yen & Chiu, Shih -Hsuan & T seng, Yi -Ren & Lu, Chuan -Pin. (2005). The Mask Detection Technology for Occluded Face Analysis in the 
Surveillance System. Journal of forensic sciences. 50. 593 -601. 10.1520/JFS2004409.  
[3] Jae Kyu Suhr, Sungmin Eum, Ho Gi Jung, Gen Li, Gahyun Kim, Jaihie Kim,Recognizability assessment of facial images for automated teller machine 
applications, Pattern Recognition,Volume 45, Issue 5,2012,Pages 1899 -1914,ISSN 0031 -3203,  
[4] J. Li et al., "Safety helmet wearing detection based on image processing and machine learning," 2017 Ninth International Conference on Advanced 
Computational Intelligence (ICACI), Doha, 2017, pp. 201 -205. 
[5] CHAROENPONG, Theekapun; SANITTHAI, Patarida. “A New Algorithm to Detect Occluded Face from a Head Viewpoint using Hough T ransform 
and Skin Ratio”. Walailak Journal of Science and Technology (WJST), [S.l.], v. 12, n. 1, p. 35 -49, oct. 2014. ISSN 2228 -835X  
[6] Rui Min, Angela D'Angelo, Jean -Luc Dugelay, “Efficient scarf detection prior to face recognition”, EUSIPCO, 18th European Signal  Processing 
Conference, Denmark, France, pp. 259 -263, Aug. 2010  
[7] Jia H., Martinez A. M., “Support vector machines in face recognition with occlusions”, Proceedings of the IEEE Computer S ociety conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Worksh ops, June 2009, pp.136 -141. 
 
 
